# Redshift Data Warehouse on AWS
Udacity Project 3: Building Redshift Data Warehouse on AWS 


### **Introduction**
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.


> They'd like to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to and will be able to test database and ETL pipeline by running queries given by the analytics team and verify results with their expected results.

### Project Description

>> Build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift

>> Load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements 

>> Create various analytics tables from staging tables


### **Project Datasets**
> Two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

>> Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data

>> Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

> Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json


> **Song Dataset**

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

> song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json

> song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

>> {'artist_id': {0: 'AR8IEZO1187B99055E'},
 'artist_latitude': {0: nan},
 'artist_location': {0: ''},
 'artist_longitude': {0: nan},
 'artist_name': {0: 'Marc Shaiman'},
 'duration': {0: 149.86404},
 'num_songs': {0: 1},
 'song_id': {0: 'SOINLJW12A8C13314C'},
 'title': {0: 'City Slickers'},
 'year': {0: 2008}}


> **Log Dataset**

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations, partitioned by year and month...

> For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
>> log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json

>> log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

>> {'artist': {0: 'Sydney Youngblood', 1: 'Gang Starr'},
 'auth': {0: 'Logged In', 1: 'Logged In'},
 'firstName': {0: 'Jacob', 1: 'Layla'},
 'gender': {0: 'M', 1: 'F'},
 'itemInSession': {0: 53, 1: 88},
 'lastName': {0: 'Klein', 1: 'Griffin'},
 'length': {0: 238.07955, 1: 151.92771},
 'level': {0: 'paid', 1: 'paid'},
 'location': {0: 'Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL',
  1: 'Lake Havasu City-Kingman, AZ'},
 'method': {0: 'PUT', 1: 'PUT'},
 'page': {0: 'NextSong', 1: 'NextSong'},
 'registration': {0: 1540558108796.0, 1: 1541057188796.0},
 'sessionId': {0: 954, 1: 984},
 'song': {0: "Ain't No Sunshine", 1: 'My Advice 2 You (Explicit)'},
 'status': {0: 200, 1: 200},
 'ts': {0: 1543449657796, 1: 1543449690796},
 'userAgent': {0: '"Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit/537.78.2 (KHTML, like Gecko) Version/7.0.6 Safari/537.78.2"',
  1: '"Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1; WOW64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/36.0.1985.125 Safari/537.36"'},
 'userId': {0: '73', 1: '24'}}


### **Schema for Song Play Analysis**

#### **Fact Table**

> **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
>> - songplay_id
>> - start_time
>> - user_id
>> - level
>> - song_id
>> - artist_id
>> - session_id
>> - location
>> - user_agent


#### **Dimension Tables**

> **users - users in the app**
>> - user_id
>> - first_name
>> - last_name
>> - gender
>> - level

> **songs** - songs in music database
>> - song_id
>> - title
>> - artist_id
>> - year
>> - duration

> **artists** - artists in music database
>> - artist_id
>> - name
>> - location
>> - latitude
>> - longitude

> **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
>> - start_time
>> - hour
>> - day
>> - week
>> - month
>> - year
>> - weekday


### **Project Template**

> Project workspace includes four files:

>> **create_tables.py** - Create fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.

>> **etl.py** - Load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into analytics tables on Redshift.

>> **sql_queries.py** - Define SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.

>> **README.md** - provides project description about process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.


### **Project Steps**

> **Create Table Schemas**
>> 1. Design schemas for fact and dimension tables
>> 2. Write SQL statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
>> 3. Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
>> 4. Write SQL statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. 
>> 5. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
>> 6. Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
>> 7. Test by running create_tables.py and verifying the table schemas in redshift database using query Editor in the AWS Redshift console.

> **Build ETL Pipeline**
>> 1. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
>> 2. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
>> 3. Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on Redshift database to compare the results with the expected results.
>> 4. Delete redshift cluster when Completed.




